Docs: Plugins Revamp (#506)
amplication/docs: docs/how-to/authentication-plugin-examples.md

pagination_next: getting-started/authentication
---

# Handle Authentication and Authorization in your Service

Authentication and authorization are important parts of your Amplication service. Amplication provides flexible options for implementing these security measures.

This guide will walk you through the process of updating your authentication and authorization setup in your Amplication-generated service.

## Adding Authentication to Your Service

If you initially created your service without authentication, you can still add it later. Here are the key steps:

1. Go to your service's Plugins page.
2. Navigate to the "Authentication" category in the left sidebar.

> 3. Choose and add an Auth Provider plugin (e.g., JWT, Auth0, etc.) that suits your needs.

Reviewer: Let's add here also ".NET" example, in addition to Auth0 etc.

Reviewer: Again- let's refer to .NET option here (Supertokens is not available in .NET for now)

> 4. Install the "NestJS Auth Module" plugin if it's not already installed. It's a pre-requisite if you're adding Authentication to a Node.js service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. In case of adding Authentication to a Node.js service, make sure to Install the "NestJS Auth Module" plugin.
```

Reviewer: I think this line- i.e. step # 4- should be before # 3 above.
In addition- do we need to add a note regarding the "User" entity? [The "User" entity is relevant for both .NET and Node.js? No so sure about it- can you check please?]

5. Configure the Authentication Entity in your service settings.

For detailed instructions on this process, refer to the [Authentication Entity documentation](https://docs.amplication.com/user-entity).

> After adding the required plugins, you'll need to:

Reviewer: If we don't detail here how to do these, I guess we need to add links to the relevant documentation pages- 
how one can configure the auth settings in the plugin options? ("see below" is a valid options as well) 
how roles are defined?
etc.

1. Configure your authentication settings in the plugin options.
2. Add authenticated users to your system.
3. Set up roles and permissions for authorization.

## Available Authentication Plugins

Amplication offers several authentication plugins to choose from. Each plugin has its own configuration options and setup process. 

### Node.js

> 1. [Auth0 Auth Provider](https://auth0.com/)

Reviewer: @dericksozo - Let's arrange it in the same order as we detail the plugins bloew

# Handle Authentication and Authorization in your Service

Authentication and authorization are crucial components of your Amplication service.

By following this guide and exploring the examples, you'll be well-equipped to implement authentication and authorization in your Amplication-generated service using the authentication plugin that best suits your needs.

## Adding Authentication to Your Service

> Before adding any specific authentication plugin, you must first enable the Authentication Entity in your service:

Reviewer: It's relevant only to Node.js, not to .NET.
In addition- it's not about "enable the Auth entitity"- but more about creating the authentication it, and defining it to be the auth entity in the service settings

1. Go to your service's Entities page.

> 2. Locate or create an entity to serve as your Authentication Entity (commonly named "User").

Reviewer: The description is not correct. I think we need to say at the beginning that this is relevant only for services which were not initially created with auth. 
Then- we should should talk about creating the entity for the authentication. We should recommend creating a User entity, as we assist in creating all the required fields for such an entity

> 3. In the entity's settings, enable the "Authentication Entity" option.

Reviewer: We don't have such an option for an entity, but one needs to go to the Service settings (see below), and define the auth entity-
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/fe6b0f48-a165-4b8c-b25c-83149a9d19fe)

:::note
The Authentication Entity **is required** to enable authentication on your service. For detailed instructions, refer to the [Authentication Entity documentation](https://docs.amplication.com/user-entity).
:::

Once you have an Authentication Entity set up, follow these steps to add authentication:

1. Navigate to your service's Plugins page.
2. Go to the "Authentication" category in the left sidebar.
3. For Node.js services, ensure you install the "NestJS Auth Module" plugin first.

> 4. Choose and add an Auth Provider plugin that suits your needs (e.g., JWT, Auth0, Supertokens, etc.).

Reviewer: And for .NET ?

By following this guide and exploring the examples, you'll be well-equipped to implement authentication and authorization in your Amplication-generated service using the authentication plugin that best suits your needs.

## Creating The Authentication Entity

> If you initially created your service _without_ authentication, you must first create and define the Authentication Entity. The Authentication Entity **is required** to enable authentication on your service.

Reviewer: Again- it's relevant to Node.js and not .NET
I think we need to mention it and explain

- Uses Passport SAML strategy and generates JWT tokens for authorization.
- For usage details, check the [SAML Auth Provider GitHub README](https://github.com/amplication/plugins/tree/master/plugins/auth-saml).

#### Basic Auth Provider

> - Enables a straightforward authentication scheme built into the HTTP protocol. - Requires sending user's credentials in the form of a username and password, encoded in base64, included in the Authorization header of the request.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Enables a straightforward authentication scheme built into the HTTP protocol. Requires sending user's credentials in the form of a username and password, encoded in base64, included in the Authorization header of the request.
```

3. Implement proper error handling and logging for authentication failures.
4. Regularly update and rotate authentication secrets and keys.
5. Follow the principle of least privilege when assigning roles and permissions.

## Examples

> Here are some examples of how to use authentication in your service:

Reviewer: Can we come up with more examples? 
The page title is "auth plugin examples", and it should be some kind of a guide- can we update it to be like that, i.e. with more "real" examples?

4. Regularly update and rotate authentication secrets and keys.
5. Follow the principle of least privilege when assigning roles and permissions.

## Disable Authentication On Your Service

If you no longer need authentication on a specific service, you can disable it.

1. Visit your service's Plugins page and toggle the Authentication-related plugins into the off state.
2. Delete the User entity from your list of entities.
3. Re-build your project and commit your changes to your preferred git provider.

> ## Examples

Reviewer: I'm not sure these are examples. It looks like we have here detailed explanations for some plugins' settings.
Is it correct? If so- let's update the title and the description below

> Let's look at detailed examples for some of the available authentication plugins:

Reviewer: Do we want to add some "real" examples like we had in this page before the changes?
Like how one can login using GraphQL, or REST API, and other examples (?).
@dericksozo - WDYT about it? Will it be useful?

1. Send a login request to the server with username and password to get back from the server the JWT token.
2. Add an authentication header with the JWT token to every consecutive request.

Following are examples of how to log in with REST API and GraphQL API.

#### Rest API

```bash title="Rest API Curl Request Example"
curl -X 'POST' \
  'https://[server-url]/api/login' \
  -H 'accept: */*' \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  -d '{
  "username": "admin",
  "password": "admin"
}'
```

![Swagger playground for login endpoint.](./../getting-started/assets/authentication/auth-rest.png)

#### GraphQL API

```graphql
mutation {
  login(credentials: { username: "admin", password: "admin" }) {
    accessToken
  }
}
```

#### Header with JWT Included (example)

<!-- spell-checker: disable -->

```text title="JWT Authorization Header Example"
 Authorization: Bearer eyJhbGciOiJIUzI1NiIsInR5cCI6IkpXVCJ9.eyJkYXRhIjoieW91IGFyZSBzb29vb28gY29vbCB0aGF0IHlvdSBjaGVjayB0aGF0ISIsIm5hbWUiOiJPZmVrIGdhYmF5IDspIiwiaWF0IjoxNTE2MjM5MDIyfQ.vaYJaP9SUlOU0u4NfFCRm5tmBVDKeCwvN6ByCkqJt8U
```

<!-- spell-checker: enable -->

### Basic Authentication (Node.js)

> When using Basic HTTP authentication, when sending a request to the API you must provide a Basic HTTP authentication header with the format:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When using Basic HTTP authentication and sending a request to the API you must provide a Basic HTTP authentication header with the format:
```

Authorization: 'type' 'credentials'

where type is Basic and credentials is the Base64 encoding of a string "username:password".

```text title="Basic Authentication Example"
Authorization: Basic YWRtaW46YWRtaW4=
```

> By default, your app comes with one user with the username `admin` and password `admin`.

Reviewer: Is it relevant to the example?
I think this info is important and we should place it much higher in the doc and in a more dominant way
